Mortal beings are made up of a combination of a soul or spirit, and material matter of [[Threa]]. When a mortal dies this combination is sundered, the mundane matter decays, and the soul is left alone. Because souls are made up of metaphysical energy from the [[Outer Realms]], they can become changed or warped if left too long on [[Threa]], and so most souls move on from the material world. A soul-shaper (usually a god) can re-form damaged souls, and change them into other beings. 

Various gods have desire or use for souls, and there are many creatures that act as psychopomps to carry souls to other realms. By tradition in most cultures on [[Threa]], a coin is placed in the mouth of someone who dies, so as to hide it from would be thieves (particularly [[Fey]] and other trickster or malicious spirits, as other mortals would not be hindered by such a trick). In some cultures, another valuable item substitutes the coin. This coin is paid to a psychopomp to carry the soul to the [[Ethereal plane]]. It is considered extremely bad luck to steal someone’s death coin, bringing terrible curses upon the thief. 

Another common burial ritual, especially for those of important or power, is to bury them with scroll of spells that they may use in their travels in the afterlife for aid and protection. Once a soul uses such a spell in the afterlife, it burns away from their burial site as well.

Only spirits with intense unfinished business, those that lose their payment, or those that are bound by magic remain on [[Threa]]. However those that do are degraded and corrupted by the nature of being pure energy beings on the material plane, and tend to be driven to a form of madness before they are ultimately destroyed. This process various from soul to soul, but can take years, decades, or even centuries for particularly willful souls.

Most spirits end up on the [[Ethereal plane]] following their separation from the body. This plane overlays [[Threa]], and shares the physical features of the other plane. The [[Ethereal plane]] has passages to several common afterlife planes. 

The first is the [[Near Shore]] of the [[Silent Sea]], both of which also border [[The Underworld]]. This is the one place that differs from the material plane in the [[Ethereal plane]]. The [[Silent Sea]] is a great, still body of water. It is said that crossing it leads to the [[Far Shore]] where a paradise and [[Issinia Slowly Unravels in Silence]] awaits. The paradise is a place of pure beauty and pleasure to souls who can cross, until they tire of existence. At that point hey can succumb to Issinia’s Embrace, and be destroyed forever. However, to cross the sea requires a soul to swim it, and souls are burdened by wrongdoings committed and attachment to the material world, which manifest as heavy chains. Any soul heavily burdened will sink to the bottom of the [[Silent Sea]] and be trapped forever in the terrifying deep, harried by monsters and soul-eating gods that live in the depths. 

The most common place for spirits to travel is to the [[The Underworld]], a plane so deep beneath the world it floats among the [[Outer Realms]]. Great passages beneath the earth lead here, even in the [[Ethereal plane]]. Here there are great cities of the dead, where they “live” out their afterlife, at least for a time. [[The Underworld]] is also populated by [[Devils]], [[Daemons or Yugoloths]], and [[Demons]] variously, which seek to take advantage of Spirits not ready to cross the [[Silent Sea]]. [[Devils]] in particular offer their services of “cleansing” souls to unburden them and ready them for passage across the [[Silent Sea]]. This process is excruciating for the recipient, which the [[Devils]] delight in, and is by no means guaranteed to work. Bound by contract, those that fail the process are consigned to the [[Devils]]’ use, which is generally to make more [[Devils]]. [[Devils]] often tempt mortals to sin, so that they are more likely to make use of their services in [[The Underworld]]. 

The another path is that held by [[Thrae]] folk. These seek to return to the great [[Spirit Wells]] of the wilds, where [[Thrae]] gods regenerate themselves and which power life and natural forces of the land. Such souls that can make their way there join a gestalt of other spirits and souls and give themselves to aid their gods and the life of the world. [[Thrae]] buried in the roots of great trees, or deposited in the [[Spirit Wells]] themselves (considered a great honor) can instantly bond their soul to the gestalt. Those who die far from such places must wander there in the material or [[Ethereal plane]]. 

The [[Atreans|Atrean]] gods offer their devout worshippers another option. Such souls can be carried to the [[Endless Citadel]] where they are bound to service in the name of the [[Atreans]]. Here they pray and take in offerings of living mortals to empower the gods and maintain the city. Those most devoted to a singular god are assigned to their quarters in the city, while others who worship the pantheon equally (a more common occurrence) act in shared prayer at the center of the city.