**Origin**
Goblinkin were an early attempt by the [[Eldorim]] tp play their hand as gods and make their own servitors. The goblin folk they created were imperfect, but considered a suitable enough first attempt for rough labor and soldiers. Thus goblinkin became skilled builders and warriors in their own way. It is said goblin craft built most of [[Karzantiss]], the great [[Eldorim]] capital.

This lasted until the [[Eldorim]] decided to challenge [[Aedai Speaks the Primordial Word]] for control of the universe. Distracted by this endeavor, the goblins revolted. The [[Eldorim]], in disgust at their betrayal, sought to destroy goblin kind from that point on, but were already besieged by [[Morosh the Blasphemous Excrescence]], and thus could not commit to the task. The [[Eldorim]] sought to create  another “better” folk for them to rule, but with their imminent destruction this did not come to pass.

>Goblins were first created by a trickster god named [[Zusk]], who had discovered where [[Ameti]] had fled to on [[Threa]] after she had created the Elves. [[Zusk]] was in wonder of this wonderous mortal folk and [[Ameti]]‘s artistry in their creation, but also could not help his nature and decided to pull a prank of a similar nature. While [[Ameti]] slept, [[Zusk]] snuck past her and stole some of her shaped souls. He swathed them in peat and bog water from a nearby swamp, though with less artistry than [[Ameti]], and formed the first Goblins. He had poured little thought or essence into his creation, so goblins were short lived, though they reproduced quickly. 

>[[Zusk]] then let the goblins free to harangue Elves and any other creatures they could find. Typically this was in the form of mischief—stealing items, vandalizing property, freeing livestock, etc. However sometimes it took a more sinister turn, with goblins raiding and killing under the banners of short lived brutes and warlords. However, goblins did not just live to harass other beings. They developed techniques of building and tunneling that, while not as precise and clean as that of the dwarves later, was quick and effective. They constructed vast warrens in hillsides, and camps with intricate underground tunnels.

After fleeing enslavement by the [[Eldorim]] Goblin communities was developed unique social and political system. They are strictly hierarchal—those in leadership roles and of higher status must be obeyed or face dire consequences. However, these roles are decided by a voting process, not lineage or birthright. During voting periods, there is an upheaval of the normal social conventions—lower status goblinoids my stand toe to toe with upper in matters of debate, and most goblinoids are allowed to throw in their lot for election. Once the elections are determined, however, the strict hierarchy comes back into place after extensive restructuring. Other societies would later borrow from and experiment with this concept of ‘democracy’, particularly kingdoms in the [[Pelepelonian Isles]] during the [[1st Era]].

Goblins became a somewhat chaotic influence in the background of other folk as they appeared in [[Threa]]. While some were content to live in their own communities, or even resettle old ruins their ancestors helped build (particularly [[Karzantiss]]), others took to raiding and piracy under petty warlords. However, goblins could never organize for long and proved more an annoyance than a threat. 

That is, until the arrival of a mysterious figure, known as [[Suljat]], the Sorcerer King. [[Suljat]] claimed to be a goblin that mastered magic, particularly magic of transformation. 

[[Suljat]] lead a campaign that created one of the earliest empires in history, since the fall of the [[Eldorim]], claiming [[Karzantiss]] as its capital in an act of ironic justice against their former creators. The Goblin empire ruled for decades, growing and assimilating nearby settlements, before [[Suljat]] was compelled to embark on a final, mysterious campaign. No one is sure what the goal of this effort was, though rumor and history suspect it had to do with seeking ancient [[Eldorim]] power. 

During final campaign, [[Suljat]] and the company of soldiers with him mysteriously disappeared. Without his force of personality, the nascent goblin empire fractured to infighting and the power vacuum, though the mighty capital remained. Later, as more [[Ametian Folk]] arrived, they would settle into [[Karzantiss]] and other former holdings of [[Suljat]]‘s empire, often times finding goblins still living there, though in a disorganized and weakened state, and opting to just live at peace with the new arrivals. 

**1st Era**
With [[Shardfall]] and the arrival of the [[Atreans|Atrean]] gods, goblin kind was by and large scattered to the lands or integrated into other societies, any vestige of imperial ambition swept away. Still, those that did not form communities in seclusion or become raiders and pirates found a place among other folk. Hobgoblins in particular were valued as tactical warriors in fights against the [[Thrae]] or in one city-state against another. 

**2nd Era**
After the [[Fall of the Divine Tower]], goblins suffered much as anyone else. Those who were not already a part of another community were largely considered just another monster to deal with in the now far more dangerous world, and suffered attacks or prejudice in lands where they weren’t already accepted.

**3rd Era**
With the stabilization and reconstruction of this era, many communities turned to goblins as builders and engineers, particularly those who could not afford or had no access to Dwarven crafters.

**4th Era**
Goblins suffered greatly under the [[Irithiel]] regime. Aside from the normal Imperial Elven attitudes of supremacy, those elves holding ancient grudges took advantage of their newfound position to punish goblinkin. 